I must say
in the field of cinema,
films are more inclined
as a whole towards realism,
in the logic behind realism.
So much so that even if there’s
magical quality or fantastical quality,
the logic of how they think
or how characters respond
are still in a realistic form of logic.
It doesn’t deviate from that logic.
Even if it’s Harry Potter or what,
that world
follows a ‘cause and effect’ rule.
And that cause and effect
is highlighted
in the whole history of drama
and the whole history of narrative.
The supreme standing
of cause and effect is important.
The illusion that realism creates
is the breaking of the fourth wall.
And the moment we sit there,
the wall breaks and we see them.
And whatever we see
from beginning ‘til the end,
that’s it.
It’s not reality,
but it’s the truth.
Of course, this also developed
and had different branches.
There’s magic realism.
There’s also hyperrealism,
where you become part
of the environment
as if you’re not just an audience,
but participants of what’s happening.
Most of the time,
it creates confusion
to the writer and to the audience
when they say it’s realistic.
They confuse it with reality.
But reality and realism
are two completely different things.
Right?
Reality has no...
Reality doesn’t have the same order
that a realistic work would have.
Because when you say realistic
you’re really just saying, "It’s alike.”
You’re creating an illusion
that this is real.
Most of the time, just like--
especially when it’s
based on a real life event,
we use those kinds of words.
“Based on real life event.”
The tendency of the beginning writer
is to include the clutter,
the disorganized condition
and irrelevant aspects
of the story
in their work.
So what happens sometimes is
the story gets jumbled
or you don’t understand
the point of the work.
I think that’s one of the clashes
you might encounter as a writer.
Because when you write
a realistic form of play,
you also have to select
what you need to put.
In the history of world theater,
especially modern theater,
realism also became a constraint.
Having unity of time,
space, and action
became constricting as well,
that’s why expressionistic
styles were born.
It manifested in visual arts
where we had abstract painting
and figures with huge heads,
three eyes.
Van Gogh’s works started there.
It was really a burst of colors.
It was more on expressing
the inner non-palpable ideas
on the canvas.
That’s also what happened
to theater, right?
The most well-known figure
in that field would be Bertolt Brecht,
who used multimedia, right?
Such as film clippings
and breaking the fourth wall,
actors talking
in front of the audience.
Or even actors telling the story
even before they are dramatized
and taking away the illusion
that what you’re seeing is real.
Something like that.
Of course, the realistic mode
didn’t disappear.
In theater, I think the reason
why we use the devices we use
is because some of them
might not translate well to cinema
the founding premise
or expectation
of the film audience
or filmmakers is in realistic mode.
The logic they employ
would be in that mode.
So that’s another category,
it’s neither traditional nor modern,
but what you choose to write.
There’s a type or style
or genre of play
that destroys
that kind of logic,
that when things
have already happened,
it doesn’t necessarily mean
it will happen again.
Because the play’s focus
is something different.
I won’t elaborate on this further
because it’s a long discourse
of having another survey
of different forms.
To clarify,
let’s separate realist logic
and the non-realist forms.
And there’s a lot of those
like surrealism, like the absurd,
there’s the expressionist,
there's Brechtian,
and many more.
These are also sources
and there are some Filipino playwrights
who were influenced by these forms.
Like me, I got influenced
when I was a kid.
It was my first time to watch a play,
the style used was absurd.
It was written by Reijoo dela Cruz.
He was from UP Samaskom
and I watched “Programang Putol Putol.”
I thought all plays were like that.
So the first play I wrote, “Recess,”
was based on that kind of structure and style
where there’s no realist logic.
At an instant,
the scenes could change
and the topic
could change abruptly.
But when you combine the stories
and when you finish the play,
you’ll feel a huge impact.
When I watched
“Programang Putol Putol,”
I was able to keep track
of the main character’s life,
but my takeaway was
“So this is what mass media is.”
It’s totally different, right?
He only used that character
in order to get in and out
of the hypocrisy of mass media,
of the illusions we see and watch
on television shows, and so on.
In fact, even at Virgin Labfest
and at other places,
I get excited when there are
other modes that emerge
or when that kind of mode is broken.
Because it demands
a change of language choice.
It demands a change of setting,
a change of perspective.
For example, “Daddy’s Girl.”
Even if it tackles sensitive topics,
it was done differently.
The issue was framed differently.
It was talking about
reincarnation, incest,
so many other things that you
couldn’t put in the logic of realism.
Also, when you choose
or when you decide to choose
a non-realistic form,
it demands of you to also
change your structure.
It doesn't necessarily need
to be chronological.
You can juxtapose the past,
present, and so on.
At the same time,
in the writing level,
if the goal is realistic
it can still be changed
during the production.
A very good example of this
is Rene Villanueva's "Kalantiaw".
I don't know if you've seen it
because it was in the early 90's.
He wrote this play about Jose Marco
and how he falsely declared
that we had a Kalantiaw Code,
how he falsified history
saying Kalantiaw Code exists,
and we had a Srivijaya Empire, and so on
just to show that--
It's the same material
with Floy Quintos' "Fake",
which shows them
making up historical sources
wherein the Philippines
already had a kingdom
before the Spaniards came.
Probably to bolster
our nationalistic pride,
our patriotic pride
that we've been civilized even before.
It was their style,
but they were all invented.
When Rene Villanueva wrote the play,
he thought of it in realistic mode.
But the director was French.
If you've seen it,
its like watching "Waiting for Godot"
Their actors are there at the side
listening and watching,
and then when it's their cue
that's the only time they enter the stage.
And then the acting
is like watching a circus.
I actually asked Rene about that,
"How was it? Did you like it?"
"Yes..."
That feeling of what else could he do?
He's not the director.
For some I guess, for that rare occasion,
the transformation worked,
it actually became
a lot more interesting as a production.